I HAVE always been convinced that if a woman once made up her mind to
marry a man nothing but instant flight could save him. Not always that;
for once a friend of mine, seeing the inevitable loom menacingly before
him, took ship from a certain port (with a tooth-brush for all his
luggage, so conscious was he of his danger and the necessity for
immediate action) and spent a year travelling round the world; but when,
thinking himself safe (women are fickle, he said, and in twelve months
she will have forgotten all about me), he landed at the selfsame port
the first person he saw gaily waving to him from the quay was the little
lady from whom he had fled. I have only once known a man who in such
circumstances managed to extricate himself. His name was Roger Charing.
He was no longer young when he fell in love with Ruth Barlow and he had
had sufficient experience to make him careful; but Ruth Barlow had a
gift (or should I call it a quality?) that renders most men defenceless,
and it was this that dispossessed Roger of his commonsense, his prudence
and his worldly wisdom. He went down like a row of ninepins. This was
the gift of pathos. Mrs. Barlow, for she was twice a widow, had splendid
dark eyes and they were the most moving I ever saw; they seemed to be
ever on the point of filling with tears; they suggested that the world
was too much for her, and you felt that, poor dear, her sufferings had
been more than anyone should be asked to bear. If, like Roger Charing,
you were a strong, hefty fellow with plenty of money, it was almost
inevitable that you should say to yourself: I must stand between the
hazards of life and this helpless little thing, oh, how wonderful it
would be to take the sadness out of those big and lovely eyes! I
gathered from Roger that everyone had treated Mrs. Barlow very badly.
She was apparently one of those unfortunate persons with whom nothing by
any chance goes right. If she married a husband he beat her; if she
employed a broker he cheated her; if she engaged a cook she drank. She
never had a little lamb but it was sure to die.

When Roger told me that he had at last persuaded her to marry him, I
wished him joy.

“I hope you’ll be good friends,” he said. “She’s a little afraid of you,
you know; she thinks you’re callous.”

“Upon my word I don’t know why she should think that.”

“You do like her, don’t you?”

“Very much.”

“She’s had a rotten time, poor dear. I feel so dreadfully sorry for
her.”

“Yes,” I said.

I couldn’t say less. I knew she was stupid and I thought she was
scheming. My own belief was that she was as hard as nails.

The first time I met her we had played bridge together and when she was
my partner she twice trumped my best card. I behaved like an angel, but
I confess that I thought if the tears were going to well up into
anybody’s eyes they should have been mine rather than hers. And when,
having by the end of the evening lost a good deal of money to me, she
said she would send me a cheque and never did, I could not but think
that I and not she should have worn a pathetic expression when next we
met.

Roger introduced her to his friends. He gave her lovely jewels. He took
her here, there, and everywhere. Their marriage was announced for the
immediate future. Roger was very happy. He was committing a good action
and at the same time doing something he had very much a mind to. It is
an uncommon situation and it is not surprising if he was a trifle more
pleased with himself than was altogether becoming.

Then, on a sudden, he fell out of love. I do not know why it could
hardly have been that he grew tired of her conversation, for she had
never had any conversation. Perhaps it was merely that this pathetic
look of hers ceased to wring his heart-strings. His eyes were opened and
he was once more the shrewd man of the world he had been. He became
acutely conscious that Ruth Barlow had made up her mind to marry him and
he swore a solemn oath that nothing would induce him to marry Ruth
Barlow. But he was in a quandary. Now that he was in possession of his
senses he saw with clearness the sort of woman he had to deal with and
he was aware that, if he asked her to release him, she would (in her
appealing way) assess her wounded feelings at an immoderately high
figure. Besides, it is always awkward for a man to jilt a woman. People
are apt to think he has behaved badly.

Roger kept his own counsel. He gave neither by word nor gesture an
indication that his feelings towards Ruth Barlow had changed. He
remained attentive to all her wishes; he took her to dine at
restaurants, they went to the play together, he sent her flowers; he was
sympathetic and charming. They had made up their minds that they would
be married as soon as they found a house that suited them, for he lived
in chambers and she in furnished rooms; and they set about looking at
desirable residences. The agents sent Roger orders to view and he took
Ruth to see a number of houses. It was very hard to find anything that
was quite satisfactory. Roger applied to more agents. They visited house
after house. They went over them thoroughly, examining them from the
cellars in the basement to the attics under the roof. Sometimes they
were too large and sometimes they were too small; sometimes they were
too far from the centre of things and sometimes they were too close;
sometimes they were too expensive and sometimes they wanted too many
repairs; sometimes they were too stuffy and sometimes they were too
airy; sometimes they were too dark and sometimes they were too bleak.
Roger always found a fault that made the house unsuitable. Of course he
was hard to please; he could not bear to ask his dear Ruth to live in
any but the perfect house, and the perfect house wanted finding.
House-hunting is a tiring and a tiresome business and presently Ruth
began to grow peevish. Roger begged her to have patience; somewhere,
surely, existed the very house they were looking for, and it only needed
a little perseverance and they would find it. They looked at hundreds of
houses; they climbed thousands of stairs; they inspected innumerable
kitchens. Ruth was exhausted and more than once lost her temper.

“If you don’t find a house soon,” she said, “I shall have to reconsider
my position. Why, if you go on like this we shan’t be married for
years.”

“Don’t say that,” he answered, “I beseech you to have patience. I’ve
just received some entirely new lists from agents I’ve only just heard
of. There must be at least sixty houses on them.”

They set out on the chase again. They looked at more houses and more
houses. For two years they looked at houses. Ruth grew silent and
scornful: her pathetic, beautiful eyes acquired an expression that was
almost sullen. There are limits to human endurance. Mrs. Barlow had the
patience of an angel, but at last she revolted.

“Do you want to marry me or do you not?” she asked him.

There was an unaccustomed hardness in her voice, but it did not affect
the gentleness of his reply.

“Of course I do. We’ll be married the very moment we find a house. By
the way, I’ve just heard of something that might suit us.”

“I don’t feel well enough to look at any more houses just yet.”

“Poor dear, I was afraid you were looking rather tired.”

Ruth Barlow took to her bed. She would not see Roger and he had to
content himself with calling at her lodgings to enquire and sending her
flowers. He was as ever assiduous and gallant. Every day he wrote and
told her that he had heard of another house for them to look at. A week
passed and then he received the following letter:

    _Roger_,

    _I do not think you really love me. I have found someone who is
    anxious to take care of me and I am going to be married to him
    to-day._

                                                           _Ruth._

He sent back his reply by special messenger:

    _Ruth_,

    _Your news shatters me. I shall never get over the blow, but of
    course your happiness must be my first consideration. I send you
    herewith seven orders to view; they arrived by this morning’s
    post and I am quite sure you will find among them a house that
    will exactly suit you._

                                                          _Roger._